# PLMs-ATG：Identification of autophagy protein by integrating protein language model embeddings and PSSM-based features using machine learing model
## 1.Introduction
We focus on the power of PLMs to improve the identification of ATGs by integrating these embeddings into classifier. We evaluate the performance of embeddings generated by three distinct PLMs(ProtT5-XL-U50, esm2_t33_650M_UR50D, and ProtBert-BFD). Our analysis builds upon existing research, utilizing dataset validated in previous studies, which consists of pure protein sequences.After processing, we gain vectors for amino acid composition (AAC) with 20 dimensions, dipeptide composition (DPC) with 400 dimensions, and amino acid distribution profiles (AADP) with 420 dimensions. To expand the scope of our study, we utilized the BLAST software package to derive position-specific scoring matrixs (PSSM) for the protein sequences, resulting in AAC-PSSM (20 dimensions), DPC-PSSM (400 dimensions), and AADP-PSSM (420 dimensions) features. When applying machine learning algorithms, we use the Python scikit-learn library to input the feature vectors into classifiers like logistic regression (LR), SVM, and so on. We also integrat deep learning techniques such as deep neural networks (DNNs) and bidirectional long short-term memory (BiLSTM) networks, conducting extensive training over many epochs to optimize parameters. Our analysis reveals that PLMs exhibit a slight advantage over PSSM-based features in terms of embedding efficiency and overall accuracy; however, certain PSSM-based features demonstrate commendable performance for this task. Therefore, we employ the Shapley Additive Explanations(SHAP) for interpretability and feature contribution ranking, allowing to perform feature selection from various combinations. The results are subsequently input into classifier and evaluate on independent test set. Figure 1 provides an overview of the primary framework of our study, detailing the pathway traced from protein sequence data through a series of predictive models to the identification of ATGs, as described in the preceding text.
## 2.Requirements
```
numpy==1.24.3
pandas==2.2.2
scikit_learn==1.5.1
torch==2.0.0
torchvision==0.15.0
biopython==1.84
seaborn==0.13.2
```
